2022 IEEE 18th International Conference on Automation Science and Engineering (CASE) | 978-1-6654-9042-9/22/$31.00 ©2022 IEEE | DOI: 10.1109/CASE49997.2022.9926579

2022 IEEE 18th International Conference on Automation
Science and Engineering (CASE)
August 20-24, 2022. Mexico City, Mexico

Posture Stabilization Control for a Quadruped Robot Walking on
Swaying Platforms
Jiayi Li, Linqi Ye, Zongxiang Jin, Houde Liu*, Bin Liang
Abstract—Compared to wheeled and tracked robots, legged
robots like quadruped robots have much more degrees of
freedom, which makes them capable to maintain a constant
posture on uneven terrains as well as moving platforms.
Previous research has focused on the locomotion of quadruped
robots in multiple motionless unstructured environments, while
the problem of walking on swaying platforms like the shaking
cable bridge is rarely studied. The posture stabilization control
on swaying surfaces remains an open problem because of the
unpredictability of the external forces and torques acting on the
feet caused by the movement of the platform. The main work of
this article is to present a method that maps static gaits from
stationary rigid platforms to swaying rigid platforms while
keeping the torso posture level during the whole walking process.
The proposed method can greatly suppress the vibration of the
fragile items or attached cameras carried by the robot, which is
important in situations such as emergency response. Simulation
results confirm the effectiveness of the method proposed.

I. INTRODUCTION
A quadruped robot has distinct advantages when working
in unstructured terrains and harsh environments. Because of
the many degrees of freedom, the gait planning of quadruped
robots is highly flexible, making them capable to accomplish
more complex tasks compared to wheeled and tracked
vehicles. For example, the BigDog robot from Boston
Dynamics can travel on inclines with a variety of surfaces and
can jump about 1.1 meters with loads [1]. Its younger fellow
SpotMini can easily walk up and down steep stairs. MIT
Cheetah 3 is allowed to do stair climbing without external
sensors [2]. The Mini Cheetah robot which has a similar
design and actuation to MIT Cheetah 3 can execute a 360°
backflip serving as an excellent stress test on peak torques and
powers [3]. Many other experiments have been carried out so
far which validate the flexibility of quadruped robots [4], [5].
Although a large number of terrains have been considered
for the gait design of legged robots [6],[7], the walking gaits
on swaying platforms are rarely studied. The swaying
platforms are widely seen in disaster sites and transportation
*This work was supported by Shenzhen Science Fund for Distinguished
Young Scholars (RCJC20210706091946001), Guangdong Special Branch
Plan for Young Talent with Scientific and Technological Innovation
(2019TQ05Z111), and National Natural Science Foundation of China
(62003188, U1813216).
J. Li, L. Ye, and H. Liu are with the Center for Artificial Intelligence and
Robotics, Tsinghua Shenzhen International Graduate School, Tsinghua
University, 518055 Shenzhen, China (e-mail:
lijiayi21@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn; ye.linqi@sz.tsinghua.edu.cn;
liu.hd@sz.tsinghua.edu.cn;). H. Liu is the corresponding author.
Z. Jin is with the Shanghai Academy of Aerospace Technology, 201900
Shanghai, China (e-mail: 34010204@qq.com).
B. Liang is with the Navigation and Control Research Center, Department
of Automation, Tsinghua University, 100084 Beijing, China (e-mail:
bliang@tsinghua.edu.cn).
978-1-6654-9042-9/22/$31.00 ©2022 IEEE

vehicles. The cable bridge, the shaking floor of an unstable
building, the cabin of an aircraft in flight, the ship deck, and
the surface of a moving vehicle are all examples of swaying
platforms. The method designed for quadruped robots to walk
on such platforms is important for emergency response, fragile
items transportation, and stabilization of cameras equipped on
the robot.
The walking method for quadruped robots moving on the
swaying platform is a challenging problem due to the
complexity and unpredictability of the shaking support surface.
Unexpected external forces and torques acting on the foot may
break the balance of the robot during the walking process so
the soft-landing problem [8]-[11] must be considered for this
kind of scenario. Although many static gaits are robust enough
on the swaying platform because the trajectory of the
zero-moment point (ZMP) is well planned based on some of
the stability criteria [6],[12]-[16], the torso will wave along
with the platform. This phenomenon harms the stable
operation of the carried equipment on the quadruped robot.
For example, it will be difficult for cameras to focus on their
target object.
The continuous-phase dynamic of the quadruped robots on
the swaying platform is getting more and more attention and is
increasingly studied [17], [18], nevertheless, these researches
didn’t address the problem of discrete foot-landing walking.
Reference [19] creates a control approach to realize provable
stable walking on a platform with pitching motion, while the
posture of the torso of the quadruped robot is not deliberately
controlled.
The main contribution of this article is presenting a posture
stabilization controller for quadruped robots walking on
swaying rigid platforms by mapping static gaits from
stationary rigid platforms to swaying rigid platforms while
keeping the torso posture level during the whole walking
process without any help of visual sensors. The simulation
model is built in CoppeliaSim and the simulation results
confirm the effectiveness of the method proposed.
The outline of this article is as follows. First, the problem
is formulated. The research background and the main idea of
the control method are introduced. The robot model is given
and the kinematics of the model is analyzed in Section Ⅱ.
Control algorithm about the attitude adjustment method and
the gait planning approach is given next in Section Ⅲ. The
simulation results are shown in Section Ⅳ. An intuitive
experiment is also done to show the application of this posture
stabilization control method. Finally, the conclusion and
future work are given in Section Ⅴ.

1959

Authorized licensed use limited to: University Town Library of Shenzhen. Downloaded on November 03,2022 at 14:05:09 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

II. PRELIMINARY
A. Problem Formulation
The swaying platforms in this paper refer to a series of
surface shaking due to the environmental impact. Swaying
platforms are commonly seen in the real world and some
typical examples as shown in Figure 1. The walking ability of
quadruped robots on these kinds of surfaces is essential to
some special scenario tasks. Emergency rescue is one of the
scenarios where the mobility of vehicles on shaking ground is
requested. It will be helpful for salvagers to have a kind of
robot which could help with searching and transportation in
unstable buildings in an earthquake or on a violent shaking
suspension bridge caused by vortex vibration, which may
protect humans from being hurt during the rescue. The surface
or interior of the transportation such as vehicles, vessels, and
aircraft can also be seen as swaying rigid platforms. A posture
stabilization method plays an important role in the mission of
protecting fragile items, which makes it possible for a
quadruped robot to work as an auxiliary targeting system for
devices that need to focus on target objects. Thus, posture
stabilization control for a quadruped robot walking on a
swaying platform is worth studying.

analyzed to obtain the conversion relationship between joint
angles and feet position in the Cartesian coordinate frame. A
virtual frame is designed in our methods to help with
implementing the gait mapping from static platforms to
swaying platforms.
First, the torso attitude is adjusted in real-time based on the
IMU information to maintain horizontal and steady. At the
same time, the angle of the platform is estimated by the
position of the feet based on joint angle information and the
kinematic model of the robot. Then, the planned feet trajectory
is mapped to the swaying platforms according to the real-time
status of the platform. The foot tips will keep at a suitable
distance from the platform during its swinging period and land
gently at the end of this period. Simulation in CoppeliaSim
verifies the effectiveness of the mapping method.
B. Robot Model
Each of the four legs has three joints including a hip
abduction/adduction (HAA) joint, a hip flexion/extension
(HFE) joint, and a knee flexion/extension (KFE) joint. These
three joints enable fully 3D control of the foot-tip position
control. The standing appearance of Laikago is shown in
Figure 2(a). Another posture of Laikago is shown in Figure
2(b) when all of the hip and knee joints of each leg are set at 0°.
are the angle of the HAA joint, the HFE joint,
and the KFE joint respectively. Note that the joints cannot
reach the state in Figure 2(b) because of the physical limitation
of the joint. This state is only a reference pose for modeling.

Figure 1. Typical swaying platforms

For quadruped robots walking on a stationary plane, the
position and angle of the supporting surface remain
unchanged, so that the contact surface of the feet and the
platform is a stationary horizontal plane or a plane with a
specific tilt angle. When gait planning is performed on such
planes, the torso trajectory is relatively stable and the position
of the foot point is predictable. When the motion of platforms
is introduced, the movement of the platform will impose
unknown forces and moments on the end of the feet, so that
the gait planned for the stationary plane cannot eliminate the
bumps of the torso, as a result, the feet will easily collide with
the contact surface undesirably resulting in the instability of
the robot.
In our formulation, the scene is relatively simple: the
platform is a rigid flat plane that rolls and pitches constantly.
The main objective of this paper is to propose an
attitude-adjustment-based method that allows the quadruped
robots to locomote over such platforms smoothly and keep the
attitude of the torso level during its walking process.
An Inertial Measurement Unit (IMU) at the center of
gravity (CoG) of the torso measuring roll, pitch, and yaw
angles is the only sensor that is needed in the control method
proposed, without any vision sensors or force sensors at the
joints or end of the feet to help with detecting the state of the
platform. Also, the movement of the platform is not given to
the controller in advance, as the movement of the platform is
always unknown to the robot in the real world.

Figure 2. Appearance of Laikago

The Modified Denavit Hartenberg (MDH) convention is
used to formulate the quadruped robot model. Since legs on
the same side have identical structures, we only need to model
one leg of each side (Figure 3 (a) and Figure 3(b)). The DH
parameters shown in Figure 3 are listed in TABLE Ⅰ. Since the
mass of the four legs of Laikago is much smaller compared to
the mass of the torso, the geometric center of the torso is
treated as the center of mass of the quadruped robot
approximately as well as the original point of the torso
coordinate
as shown in Figure 2(a). Different transfer
matrices from the torso coordinate frame to the foot coordinate
frame are used for each leg, and the transfer matrix for one leg
is shown as follow

(1)

We model a quadruped robot according to the physics
parameters of the Laikago robot from UnitreeRobotics.
Modified DH (MDH) method is used to model the quadruped
robot. Forward kinematics and inverse kinematics are
1960

Authorized licensed use limited to: University Town Library of Shenzhen. Downloaded on November 03,2022 at 14:05:09 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

where
and
represents
and
.
and
represents
and
.
refers to the position of the origin of the
HAA joint frame
in the torso frame
. Subscripts that
distinguish the legs are omitted in this article for simplicity.

III. CONTROLLER DESIGN
A. Overall Control Architecture
The overall control architecture of the walking method
proposed is shown in Figure 4. The system has three main
parts. An attitude adjustment policy is used in the control
architecture to stabilize the posture of the torso with the help
of the IK solution based on the model of the quadruped robot.
Walking gait is planned off-line and mapped to the robot in
real-time according to the current posture of the torso.

Figure 3. MDH coordinate frame of the legs
TABLE I.
Link

1

DH
parameters

Values

Figure 4. Overall control architecture

B. Attitude Adjustment
Attitude Adjustment is carried out in real-time in the
proposed method. We first assume that the friction between
the platform and the feet is big enough so that the robot would
not slip during its walking process. The rotation matrix of the
frame
relative to the world frame
can be written as
follow

DH PARAMETERS
Link

DH
parameters

Values

3

(5)
2

where ,
and
are the rotation matrices about the x-axis,
y-axis, and z-axis respectively. , , are floating-base roll,
pitch, and yaw angles of the torso concerning the frame
.

4

The inverse kinematics of the model are analyzed based on
(1). The foot tip position vector with respect to torso frame
is defined as
(the subscript 4 is
omitted in the rest of the paper), and the corresponding joint
angles can be solved as follow

Taking the coordinate frame of the supporting surface of
the foot as a reference, the torso posture is controlled by
adjusting the angles of the joints to compensate for the
fluctuation of the platform. PID controller is used to adjusting
the control input , ,
in (6)

(6)
(2)
where

where
(3)

is the proportional gain,

is the differential gain

and ,
,are the integral parts with upper and lower bounds.
Footmark and
of the control input and floating-base
angles are used to distinguish the signal at the current moment
and the signal a time step ago. The target foot tip position
vector
of each leg can be calculated as (7)

(4)
the value which is closer to the joint angle at the previous
moment is taken. This inverse kinematics (IK) model is used
in the following controller design.

(7)

1961

Authorized licensed use limited to: University Town Library of Shenzhen. Downloaded on November 03,2022 at 14:05:09 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

where
is the vector of the real-time foot tip position
calculated through real-time joint angles and forward
kinematics model and
is the position of the origin of
frame {0}. An Intuitive adjustment effect can be seen in
Figure 5. By calculating the desired feet position
for each
leg and taking the IK solution of the joints as control inputs,
the robot is able to keep its torso level. Position control is
used to adjust the joint angles with a limitation of the
maximum joint speed to protect the joint motors.

2) Let the projection of the CoG move to the incentre of the
supporting leg triangle before the leg is swinging up.
3)When the leg is swinging, map the planned trajectory to
the swaying platform based on the real-time state of the
platform.
The mapping method in 3) is a geometric mapping based
on a virtual frame
. The origin of
is placed at
in frame
, where h is the desired height of the
robot. The direction of x-axis, y-axis and z-axis are defined by
unit vectors , and respectively

(8)
Figure 5. Attitude adjustment

C. Gait Planning
A basic walking cycle for a quadruped robot walking on a
static platform is shown in Figure 6.

where vectors

,

,
, and
are the
real-time position of the foot tips of the right front leg, right
hind leg, left front leg, and left hind leg respectively. When
one of the legs is swinging, taking the situation that the right
front leg is swinging for example, , and are defined as
follow

(9)
Figure 6. Quadrupedal walking cycle

The blue arrowed line indicates the trajectory of the
projection of the center of mass of the robot on the platform.
When this kind of gait is used directly on a swaying platform,
the projection of CoG can easily fall off the edge of the
supporting polygon due to the movement of the platform as
shown in Figure 7. If the support legs leave the ground, the
swinging leg will collide with the platform when it moves to
the originally planned foothold, causing the quadruped robot
to shake severely and eventually tip over.

A height vector
is used to record the
height of the quadruped robot. For any static gait planned for
walking on a stationary platform, the target foot tip position
can be written in the form as follow
(10)
where , and are coefficients of the unit vectors of axes
of
. Then we can get a mapped target foot tip position
for the swaying platform which can be calculated as follow
(11)

Figure 7. Projection of CoG on stationary and swaying platforms

To solve this problem, an attitude-adjustment-based
walking method for quadruped robots on swaying rigid
platforms is designed, which maps the basic gait from
stationary platforms to the swaying platform. The specific
steps are as follows:
1) Adjust the body posture of the quadruped robot in
real-time to keep it level through the method mentioned in
Section Ⅲ part B.

With the help of the geometry mapping, a position-controlled
gait designed for a stationary platform can be used on a
swaying platform by replacing the origin target foot tip
position with the new target
. As the unit vector , and
are computed in real-time, the new target is well-matched
for the swaying platform at any time. In this way, the distance
between the foot tip and the platform is almost the same as that
when walking on the static platform, as a result, there will not
be a strong collision when the foot touches the swaying
platform. In our experiment, a simple cycloid trajectory is
used and mapped in real-time.

1962

Authorized licensed use limited to: University Town Library of Shenzhen. Downloaded on November 03,2022 at 14:05:09 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

IV. SIMULATION RESULTS
The CoppeliaSim simulation software is used to validate
the effectiveness of the method proposed in this article.
Dynamic engine Newton is used and the simulation time step
is set as 50ms. The physical parameters of the quadruped robot
in the simulation are set according to the official manual of
Laikago. The swaying rigid platform shakes with a
whole-body rolling motion (Nominal rolling amplitude = ±4°.
Nominal rolling frequency = 0.125Hz), and a whole-body
pitching motion (Nominal pitching amplitude = ±4 ° .
Nominal rolling frequency = 0.11Hz). The frequency of
rolling and pitch motion is set a little differently to mimic
random platform motion. The simulation scene is shown in
Figure 8.

Another simulation is also performed to test the
effectiveness of the mapping method alone. In this case, we
didn’t move the projection of the CoG to the incentre of the
supporting leg triangle before the leg is swinging up and the
CoG keeps moving forward. The walking speed goes up to
1.8m/min because there’s no CoG moving period. The red
dotted lines in Figure 10 show the amplitude peak of the roll
and pitch angle in the previous experimen. In this simulation,
the amplitude of the torso becomes a little bigger (roll and
pitch angle within 1.75°) as a result. Both of the simulations
show the effectiveness of the mapping method.

Figure 8. Simulation model

Figure 10. Comparison simulation result

The gait parameters are as follows

An intuitive simulation was taken, during which a camera
was put on the torso of the quadruped robot to test the ability
to stabilize the camera view. The simulation scenario is
shown in Figure 11. A cube with a side length of 0.5 m is
located 20m away in front of the robot.

1) Step length = 30cm.
2) Maximum swing-foot height = 4cm.
3) Walking speed = 0.9m/min.
A fifty-second simulation is taken to let the quadruped
robot walk straight on the swaying platform and the result is
shown in Figure 9.
It can be seen from the simulation result shown in Figure 9
that the quadruped robot can walk on the swaying platform
with the roll angle and pitch angle of the torso within 1°.
Simulation results verify the effectiveness of the proposed
method. It shows that the walking of a quadruped robot on the
moving platform surface can be realized by adjusting the torso
posture in real-time and mapping the static platform gait to the
moving platform.

Figure 11. The simulation scene with a camera and a target object

Figure 12. Camera views comparison

Figure 9. Simulation result of walking on a swaying platform
1963

Authorized licensed use limited to: University Town Library of Shenzhen. Downloaded on November 03,2022 at 14:05:09 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

The comparison of the camera views of a quadruped robot
walking with a normal static gait and walking with the gait
using the posture stabilization control method proposed is
given in Figure 12(a) and Figure 12(b) respectively. It can be
seen that the cube floats up and down when nothing is done to
keep the posture level. However, the target object remains in
the center of view during the walking process when the
posture of the torso is stabilized.
V. CONCLUSION
In this article, a posture stabilization control method for a
quadruped robot walking on a swaying platform is presented.
The torso posture of the quadruped robot is adjusted in
real-time to maintain level during the whole walking process.
Static gait planned for robots walking on stationary platforms
is mapped to the swaying platforms to avoid strong collision
between the swing leg and the platform with the help of a
virtual frame. The proposed method improves the stability of
the quadruped robot on the moving support surface and can
provide a relatively stable working environment for the
equipment mounted on the torso. CoppeliaSim simulation
validates the effectiveness of the proposed method.
Though walking successfully, the walking speed of the
robot is limited and, in the future, more efficient compliant
control will be developed to tune the landing foot position as
apparent vibration often occurs when the swinging foot
touches the platform. Meanwhile, only the current
information of the platform is used in this method, a
prediction of platform movement can be made to help with
the planning of foot trajectories so that a faster walking speed
is achievable. A temporal Convolutional Network and
reinforcement learning based on state information of the
robot may help the system to show better performance.

IEEE/ASME Trans. Mechatron., vol. 23, no. 6, pp. 2681–2692, Dec.
2018.
[8] D. P. Ferris, M. Louie and C. T. Farley, “Running in the real world:
Adjusting leg stiffness for different surfaces”, Proc. Roy. Soc. London.
Ser. B: Biol. Sci., vol. 265, no. 1400, pp. 989-994, 1998.
[9] J. J. Aguilar and D. I. Goldman, “Robophysical study of jumping
dynamics on granular media”, Nature Phys., vol. 12, no. 3, pp. 278-283,
2015.
[10] S. Roberts and D. E. Koditschek, “Reactive velocity control reduces
energetic cost of jumping with a virtual leg spring on simulated
granular media,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robot. Biomimetics, 2018, pp.
1397-1404.
[11] D. J. Lynch, K. M. Lynch and P. B. Umbanhowar, “The Soft-Landing
Problem: Minimizing Energy Loss by a Legged Robot Impacting
Yielding Terrain,” IEEE Robotics and Automation Letters, vol. 5, no. 2,
pp. 3658-3665, April 2020.
[12] S. Ma, T. Tomiyama and H. Wada, “Omnidirectional static walking of
a quadruped robot,” IEEE Transactions on Robotics, vol. 21, no. 2, pp.
152-161, April 2005.
[13] R. B. McGhee and A. A. Frank, “On the stability properties of
quadruped creeping gaits,” Mathematical Biosciences, vol.3,
pp.331-351, 1968.
[14] S. M. Song and K. J. Waldron, “An analytical approach for gait study
and its applications on wave gaits,” The International Journal of
Robotics Research, vol.6, no.2, pp.60-71, 1987.
[15] C. D. Zhang and S. M. Song, “Stability Analysis of Wave-Crab Gaits of
a Quadruped,” Journal of Robotic Systems, vol. 7, no. 2, pp. 243-276,
1990.
[16] S. Hirose, H. Tsukagoshi, and K. Yoneda, “Normalized energy stability
margin and its contour of walking vehicles on rough terrain,” in IEEE
International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA) , 2001,
pp. 181-186.
[17] B. Henze, R. Balachandran, M. Roa-Garzón, C. Ott, and A.
Albu-Schäffer, “Passivity analysis and control of humanoid robots on
movable ground,” IEEE Robot. Autom. Lett., vol. 3, no. 4, pp.
3457–3464, Oct. 2018.
[18] J. Englsberger, G. Mesesan, C. Ott, and A. Albu-Schäffer,
“DCM-based gait generation for walking on moving support surfaces,”
in Proc. IEEERAS Int. Conf. Humanoid Robot., 2018, pp. 1–8.
[19] A. Iqbal, Y. Gao and Y. Gu, “Provably Stabilizing Controllers for
Quadrupedal Robot Locomotion on Dynamic Rigid Platforms,”
IEEE/ASME Transactions on Mechatronics, vol. 25, no. 4, pp.
2035-2044, Aug. 2020.

REFERENCES
[1] M. Raibert, K. Blankespoor, G. Nelson, R. Playter, and the BigDog
[2]

[3]
[4]

[5]

[6]
[7]

Team, “Bigdog, the rough-terrain quadruped robot,” in Proceedings of
the 17th World Congress, Seoul, Korea,2008, pp. 10822–10825.
G. Bledt, M. J. Powell, B. Katz, J. Di Carlo, P. M. Wensing and S. Kim,
“MIT Cheetah 3: Design and Control of a Robust, Dynamic Quadruped
Robot,” in 2018 IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent
Robots and Systems (IROS), 2018, pp. 2245-2252.
B. Katz, J. D. Carlo and S. Kim, “Mini Cheetah: A Platform for Pushing
the Limits of Dynamic Quadruped Control,” in 2019 International
Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA), 2019, pp. 6295-6301.
M. Hutter, C. Gehring, D. Jud, A. Lauber, C. D. Bellicoso, V. Tsounis,
J. Hwangbo, K. Bodie, P. Fankhauser, M. Bloesch, R. Diethelm, S.
Bachmann, A. Melzer, and M. Hoepflinger, “ANYmal - a highly
mobile and dynamic quadrupedal robot,” in IEEE/RSJ International
Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems, 2016, pp. 38–44.
C. Semini, V. Barasuol, J. Goldsmith, M. Frigerio, M. Focchi, Y. Gao,
and D. G. Caldwell, “Design of the hydraulically actuated, torque
controlled quadruped robot hyq2max,” IEEE/ASME Transactions on
Mechatronics, vol. 22, pp. 635–646, April 2017.
S. Kajita et al., “Biped walking pattern generation by using preview
control of zero-moment point,” in 2003 IEEE International Conference
on Robotics and Automation, vol.2, 2003, pp. 1620-1626.
X. Liu, A. Rossi, and I. Poulakakis, “A switchable parallel elastic
actuator and its application to leg design for running robots,”

1964

Authorized licensed use limited to: University Town Library of Shenzhen. Downloaded on November 03,2022 at 14:05:09 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

